1 
  
Examination code :  
 
Code  ELVH18GBM      
 Subject:  
  
Human Dynamics  
Date:  
     
Practice  
 Starting time:  
 
 School:  
 
 School  
Room:  
  
 Group:  
  
BME Minor  
 Duration:  
 
2.5 hours  
 
During the Exam the following Lecturers can be 
contacted;  
Name:   
Telephone number:   
 Number of pages:      9 
 
Aids and appliances:  
 
Calculator : 
 -Casio FX 82 MS  and / or  
 -TI-30XB multiview  and / or  
 -TI-30XS multiview  
 
 
 
 
 Remaining namely:  
 
Examination paper  
Hand in Exampaper:  Yes 
 
Hand in scribble -paper:  No           
  
Particulars:  
 
A total amount of 100 points can be achieved. The final grade for this exam is the 
total number of points divided by 10.  
55 points are needed to pass the exam. The lowest grade is a 1  
 
Student Name :                                                            
 
 
 
 
  
Student number:  
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 1) Theory  (50 points):  
 
a) The unitless dimension ‘Reynold’s number’ represents the ratio of two 
types of forces, what are they?  (2 points)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b) Give a brief explanation of what the governing laws of fluid flow mean : 
i) Conservation of Mass  (4 points)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ii) Conservation of Linear / Angular Momentum  (4 points)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c) The left half of the heart pumps blood throughout the body but the right 
part is dedicated to one area. What is this area of the body and why is 
half of the heart dedicated to it? (5 points)  
 
  

3 
 d) How are the valves within the heart opened and closed?  (2 poin ts) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
e) What occurs at the respiratory boundary ? (3 points)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
f) Explain the mechanism of how synovial fluid is stored in a joint and 
how it is used to lubricate the joint during motion.  (5 points)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
g) Give two advantages of using titanium as an implant material . (4 
points)  
 
 
 
 
 
  

4 
 h) Briefly explain how volume based computational fluid dynamics can 
model flows within the human body and what it means to be ‘mesh 
independent’. (5 points)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i) What is the main function o f: 
i) Red blood cells (2 points)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ii) White blood cells (2 points)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii) Platelets (2 points)  
 
 
  

5 
 j) Draw below how the velocity profile of blood will look as it flows through 
a cylindrical blood vessel. Explain any differences between your 
velocity profile and that of an inviscid Newtonian fluid shown as an 
example.  (10 points)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Blood      Inviscid Newtonian Fluid  
 
 
  

6 
 2) Static Fluid Pressures  (15 Points)  
Determine the pressure at point a . 
 
  


7 
 3) Partial Pressures  (7 Points)  
Is it safe to dive at a depth of 30m with a mixture containing 20% oxygen for a 
long period of time when a partial pressure of oxygen above 60kPa can be 
dangerous? Proof your answer with a calculation. (Assume other components 
of the gas are not dangerous and the surface of the water is at  sea level)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4) Composite Materials ( 5 Points)  
A composite material is to be put into the body as an implant material. This 
composite has a plastic matrix with carbon fibres aligned parallel to the load. 
The fibres make up 10% of the volume of the composite and has a Young’s 
modulus of 100GPa and the m atrix has a Young’s modulus of 3GPa. 
Determine the Young’s modulus of the entire composite in this direction.  
  

8 
 5) Moving Fluid Flows  (15 points)  
Determine the distance between the inlet and outlet of th is system  containing 
water . Assume the inlet and outlet are both circular.  The inlet has a radius of 
5cm and the outlet has a radius of 4cm. The water flows into the inlet at a rate 
of 1.5m/s.  The pressure at the inlet is 105kPa and the pressure at the outlet is 
101.3kPa.  
 
  


9 
 6) Boyle’s Law  (8 points)  
Determine the volume of air that you blow from your lungs into a balloon if you 
want the balloon to expand 1L in volume. The elasticity of the balloon applies 
some extra pressure, you can treat the pressure and density of the  air in the  
balloon as constants of 103kPa and 1.2kg/m3. Your body temperature is 37 °𝐶 
and the room is 20 °𝐶. The pressure in the atmosphere is 101kPa.  
 
 
 

